What I'm here to talk
about today is application,
inter-application
communication on Mac OS X.
There are a lot of
different ways of achieving
inter-application communication,
but I want you to get out of this talk
the understanding of what frameworks
are available and some of the different
limitations of the frameworks.
When we talk about
inter-application communication,
when you get right down to it,
the operating system is kind of
like just another application.
When you request a service
from the operating system,
you're making an interprocess call,
and the kernel is going to
give you back some result.
And it really lets you think about
the whole system as individual
applications are building blocks,
just like frameworks are building blocks
that let you build your application.
Only when applications are participating
in interprocess communication,
they can all be put together by users.
That's really scripting,
and I'll get to scripting
quite a bit later.
So there are different
frameworks in our system.
Our system has a long legacy
from Unix to Mac OS 9 APIs,
7 APIs, and Objective-C APIs,
and it keeps growing into the future.
And all these different APIs are
going to be available to us.
So this is what I'm hoping you'll
learn coming out of this session.
What frameworks are available?
What APIs are available?
A familiarity with these APIs and
what they're all capable of.
I want you to be able to decide
whether there's an existing
conversation someplace that would
make sense for you to participate in.
The scripting conversations,
there's a well-established community
of scripting that's available.
So you would want to plug into
that with your application so that
scripters can script your application.
And then there's finding
someone to talk to.
This is actually a
really important thing.
And because of the way our
system partitions applications
into their own address space,
the behavior of finding somebody to
talk to is different in Mac OS X than
it's ever been in Mac OS 9.
There's been a lot of confusion about
this and how things don't quite work
the way they did under Mac OS 9.
And I'm hoping that we'll be able
to explain some of why that is.
So here are the frameworks that
we're basically going to talk about.
There's the Unix and
Mach APIs that came out of,
well, Darwin, basically.
and Apple Events and
Objective-C distributed objects are,
of course, an application layer API.
It's a much higher level of
doing interprocess communication.
These can both be used locally between
processes and over the network with other
applications running on other machines.
And then finally,
Web Services and what we're
doing with Web Services in
the application frameworks.
All right, so here's our bubbly diagram.
It shows basically where POSIX and
UNIX live and Mach Messaging
lives right at the bottom.
Application frameworks live on top,
and then your applications
live on top of that.
So let's talk just first
about POSIX streams.
All right.
POSIX streams are, well,
POSIX pipes and sockets
are typically stream-based.
What we mean by that is you're going
to write a byte in one end and you're
going to read a byte out of the other.
And there are a couple of
different APIs in that space.
Pipe and socket are
probably the most common.
This is how you create one of these
file descriptors that you're going
to write data to or read data out of.
The to in parentheses, by the way,
that means there's a man page for this.
I know a lot of you
are old Mac developers.
Some of you are Unix developers.
Man pages are going to be
somewhat new to Mac developers
that haven't used Unix a lot.
So when you see that to,
go ahead and type man to pipe and
you'll get some information about it.
So pipe and socket are ways
of creating a file descriptor.
Socket can be used to create
interprocess file descriptors.
That's the AF Unix address family.
And it can also be used to create
TCP IP pipes so that logically you're
just writing to a file descriptor,
but you're really going out over a
network and talking to another site.
Now the important thing about
file descriptors is that by
default they're going to block.
If you do a read and
there's no data available,
your process is now blocked
waiting for that read to complete.
So if you have multiple file
descriptors that you want to read from,
you don't want to do that.
You don't want to have three
threads all blocked and read.
You want to use a function called select.
This lets you say here are a bunch
of file descriptors that I want to
know when data becomes available
or when their state changes.
Select takes that array and
it blocks and then returns
when there is data available.
Excuse me.
[Transcript missing]
Well,
I'll talk about it more in a few slides,
but basically it's a way of
presenting data to other applications.
And typically,
you don't want that data to be changing
while other applications are using it.
I'll talk about that in a couple slides.
Pipes and sockets are the most
portable interprocess communication
mechanism on our platform,
as long as most portable
means other Unixes.
If you're porting a Linux application,
chances are if it's
using pipes and sockets,
it's just going to work out of the box.
And that's fine.
There's nothing wrong with that.
But it isn't well supported
by the Mac OS X application
frameworks because your application,
especially applications with UI,
are receiving events
from multiple sources.
Events are coming in
from the Windows server.
Events are coming in from IOCit.
You need to be able to capture all
these events in a single place.
That's what the run loop is for.
So if you're trying to read
data out of a file descriptor,
you're going to want to wrap it in
something that has some affinity for it.
It's going to allow the run loop
to do its job of demultiplexing
several incoming messages and
sending them to your application,
letting your application deal with it.
CFStream,
part of the core foundation network,
does this by sort of emulating select.
It's an implementation
detail how that works.
But the upshot is you can use
a CFStream wrapped around a
file descriptor and receive
notifications when data is available.
And that's a really good idea
if you're trying to do that.
You can use a file descriptor based
I/O within a higher level application.
So pipes and sockets aren't terribly
efficient for large transfers of data,
arbitrary data,
because every byte that gets written
gets read out the other side.
What you see then is just a
linear time to send a message,
depending on the message size.
So the best use for pipes and
sockets that you're going to see is
reading output from a forked command.
When you call fork in your application,
the child process inherits
your file descriptors.
So the child process
can then start reading,
and you can just write bytes,
and the child process reads and
communicates back and forth that way.
That's typically how
you're going to see --
[Transcript missing]
So shared memory is, you know,
can be a great way of sharing
memory between applications.
But the problem here is that
typically you're going to have one
person performing updates to that
memory and other people reading it.
When one of the other people
reads from that memory,
the most it can be guaranteed
it read atomically is 32 bits.
So if application A has performed
some operation and built a
certificate or something that it
wants to share among applications,
it has to somehow flag that to another
application that all that memory can
be read and that the other application
was able to read all that memory
without it changing underneath.
So that's why I say it requires some
sort of external synchronization.
That could either be a checksum on
the memory that was read or perhaps
using a file descriptor just saying,
okay, the data is available.
Tell me when you're done reading it.
Then I can unlock this
memory and keep going.
So the best use for shared memory, then,
is going to be to share work that you've
done among several other applications.
So there's a new Unix
API in Mac OS Tim Panther.
This is the Notify API.
And what it allows you to do is
to subscribe for notifications
that something happened.
Now,
what that something is is entirely up to
the notification that's being defined.
The notification has no
payload associated with it.
It's just an indication
that something happened.
Because of this, or regardless of this,
notifications can be coalesced.
If 10 things happen,
you may only hear about one of them
because all these notifications
will be coalesced into one event
delivered to your application.
Your application subscribes
to notifications.
It can either pull for them,
or it can listen on a file descriptor
or receive them via a Mach message.
And one way to think about this,
it's a better signal.
Signal is traditionally how
you tell a Unix project.
You can either go away, you're dead now,
or reread your preferences file.
That would be SIG HUP a lot of times.
The problem with signal is you have
no control over when your process
is going to receive a signal.
So when people in the
past have used signal,
they might want to say, oh, well,
you know, I got my signal.
I'm going to use some application API.
You can't really do that.
It's like interrupt time at Mac OS 9.
You don't know the state
of all the frameworks.
So notify.
That would be a better way to architect
your processes so that you have some
control over where events come in,
these specific one-off notifications.
So here's a code sample.
Okay, it's good and readable.
This is how the client is going to
register to receive notifications.
There's a new call,
notify register file descriptor.
And you give it the name of the
notification you want to subscribe to.
In this case,
it's handing back a file descriptor
that I'm going to block and read.
I already said you don't want to do that,
but this is a sample.
It also hands back a token that
represents that notification
so that we can delete it later.
Then I'm just going to read from this,
and my read is going to block
until the notification actually
is sent by another process.
Notifications.
How do I want to say this?
Later on, we're going to see that there
are different partition spaces
for applications to run in.
Notifications are global
across all of those.
So the server, which is typically running
in another process,
just says, notify post.
Anybody who subscribed to
that notification using
any of file descriptor,
Mach, port delivery,
[Transcript missing]
Back to the architecture diagram.
The next thing I want to talk
about is Mach Messaging itself.
It would be the subject of a
much longer talk to discuss
everything about Mach Messaging.
So what I'd like to have happen is for
us to understand some of the terms that
we use when we talk about Mach Messaging
so that when you run into it,
you're not startled or you're able to
work with code that uses Mach Messaging.
So the first thing is that Mach Messaging
allows you to implement servers.
Servers exist all over the system.
The Windows server,
it's even got server in the name,
is responsible for handling user events
and sending them to your application.
In effect, your application is a server
because it receives events and
performs some action based on them.
So servers exist in your process,
in other processes, and in the kernel.
The kernel provides some
servers for doing things
like getting the time of day.
for example, could be a server.
When you send a Mach Message,
these are some of the terms
that you need to know,
need to understand what it is that
you're sending into the kernel.
Mach Message itself is the
name of the kernel trap.
This is the subroutine, it looks like,
to an application developer that
you call to send a message and
actually to receive a reply.
It's the same trap.
Mach Message Header T is the
name of a structure that contains
the actual Mach Message data.
It's a variable length structure.
It's got a header that sort of
defines the size of the structure,
and then they're going to be
in the variable length part.
There's what are called
descriptors for out-of-band
memory regions and Mach ports.
So Mach ports, you're going to see
these all over the place.
And when you get down to it,
it seems like everything is a Mach port.
Tasks seem to be a Mach port.
Threads seem to be a Mach port.
So when you send a Mach Message,
you send it to a Mach port.
Ports have writes associated with them.
You can have a receive write on a port.
That means you're
allowed to receive data.
Somebody else has a
send write on that port.
That person can send data.
You can receive it.
There's also a send once write,
and this is used when you send somebody.
An event, and you want a reply back.
You can send them a send
once write on a port.
They're allowed to send you exactly
one message back on that port.
You receive it,
and you deal with the reply.
This is kind of a security thing.
You don't want people just sort of
blasting messages out to ports that
they don't have rights to do so on.
There's also something called a port set,
which is itself, it looks like a port.
A port set is effectively
the same as a select call.
Actually, it's an FD set,
which is the parameter to a select call.
You can select multiple
ports into a port set,
and then with one Mach Message call,
monitor all those ports
for an event to come in.
What's interesting about that is the run
loop in CF run loop does that for you.
So if you use the core foundation
wrappers on top of Mach Ports,
you'll get the behavior of
an entire selection of ports
being received upon at once,
and that's a really good thing
because you don't have to have 10
people blocked in Mach Message.
Out-of-band memory is a
really important concept,
and it basically lets you send a message
to somebody else sharing your memory.
But when the receiver gets the memory,
he doesn't strictly own it.
He's allowed to read from it,
if you give him that option,
and he's allowed to touch it.
But if he touches it,
he's going to get a copy of the memory.
Now, a lot of subsystems are
built on top of this,
because typically when you
message data to someone,
they're going to read from the data,
but they're not necessarily
going to write to it.
So that's an out-of-band
memory descriptor.
It provides virtual copies of
memory between applications.
You're given the option of marking
it read-only or copy-on-write when
it gets messaged to the other side.
One thing to note is that the memory
that you send should be page-aligned.
The reason for this is that if you
message memory that's not page-aligned,
then the kernel is going to
copy the first and last page,
make new pages for those,
and zero out the stuff that
isn't actually explicitly sent.
So ideally, you're going to send multiple
pages of page-aligned data.
That's not always possible.
And sometimes you'll wind up
with pages copied on either side.
This is a process called box-carring.
You don't want, you know,
if the block beforehand
is a pointer that's got,
you know, the user's password,
you don't want that going
to another application.
So by aligning the memory,
you'll get much better
performance through Mach Message.
You need to plan for memory management.
When you receive a Mach message
that has out-of-band memory in it,
you need to deallocate that memory.
You own that memory,
or you think that you own it,
but the kernel will take care
of copying it if necessary.
But you need to deallocate it,
otherwise it will just leak
and consume vast resources.
So VM deallocate is the
call you use to do that.
Whatever the address
is that came into you,
use VM deallocate to deallocate it later.
You don't have to do that right away.
You can hang on to that memory
for as long as you want.
Just be aware that you own it and
you still need to get rid of it.
Okay, so a Mach Message structure,
here's gonna be an example Mach Message.
Basically, it's a green box with,
at the very top,
there's a Mach Message header T.
This is where you specify the message ID.
This is how the receiver of the
message is going to demultiplex the
message and decide what to do with it.
The size of the whole green
box and the reply port,
the port that is going to get sent back
from the server that responds to this.
Then this is all variable
length data after it.
But the first thing after the header
has got to be the descriptor count,
which could be zero.
The descriptor count in this
case is going to be two.
We're going to have two descriptors
following the Mach Message header T.
The first descriptor,
we're going to send an
out-of-line memory region.
These descriptors are
fixed length structures.
You fill in attributes of them and just
append them to the end of the message.
For an out-of-line memory region,
it's just the address and the size.
While it would be nice if the
address were page-aligned,
if it's not, the Mach Message trap will
take care of that for you.
There's also the attributes in
that memory descriptor about
how to deal with the memory,
whether or not the memory should
be copy-on-write or read-only.
the server process.
Then in this example,
I'm also going to send a Mach port.
This might be the case where
I'm telling the server,
"Here's some data.
Process this out-of-line data,
and when you're done doing that work,
you can contact me on this Mach port
that the work is complete."
After that,
you can have whatever data you want.
So what you're going to see a lot
of times is that a Mach message
typically will have zero descriptors,
and it will have a whole bunch of
just data sitting after the header.
And that's really the
body of the message.
Core foundation in the
CFMochPort de-muxing routines,
it allocates a certain amount of space
on the stack to receive a Mach message.
But if the message is too big,
it allocates a larger buffer
and then does the work again.
So, ideally,
you want to keep your message size small.
It's kind of an implementation
detail of CFMochPort.
But it's interesting that if the
message that you're receiving is
too big for the buffer you supplied,
you get a chance to allocate a larger
buffer and receive the message again.
Obviously, that's less efficient.
So you want to make sure if you're
receiving the event yourself
that it is the minimum size,
or sorry,
the maximum size of all the messages
that you're likely to receive.
So how do you find somebody to
talk to with a Mach Message?
This is probably one of the
most important things now
because of fast user switching.
You have to discover Mach services,
and you do this through a mechanism
called the Bootstrap Server.
This associates a symbolic
name with a server.
There are several Bootstrap
Servers on the system.
When the system is starting up,
there's the primordial Bootstrap Server.
This is where demons live,
where we call them startup
items in our new lingua.
When a server that is running in a
startup item starts up or it registers
itself with a bootstrap server,
it is then visible to other bootstrap
servers that get created after the fact.
So if you're running within
an application context,
you're a Netscape
plug-in inside of Safari,
you're allowed to see
services vended by daemons.
Let me go on to the next slide.
This will show it a little better.
Daemons live in this
little world out here.
User A applications and
User B applications are allowed
to see into the daemon world.
Daemons can't see into,
they cannot look up services
that are vended by processes
within the user's bootstrap ports,
within these bootstrap ports
that were created for the user.
This is why you cannot send an
Apple event in Jaguar from a daemon
or an Apache module to iTunes,
for example.
Um,
This is done for security reasons.
We don't want just arbitrary code running
in the bootstrap server world to be able
to manipulate user land applications.
So, how do you write a Mach Message?
How do you decide what the structure
of a Mach Message is going to be?
You can do it by yourself.
You can roll your own.
That's a real pain.
Or you can use MIG,
the Mach Interface Generator.
This is an IDL for describing
the structure of a Mach Message.
It handles marshaling parameters
of scalar types and descriptor
types into a Mach Message,
sending it to a server,
and processing the response.
So, giving it back to you in a way that
fits in easily with your application.
It associates a unique
ID with each message,
and it provides a demuxing routine that
takes care of switching on that ID and
calling your server implementation.
So,
here's an example that you'll see a lot,
which is a check-in on a service.
Where this would be used is a
daemon that wants to provide a
service for a user application.
The user application will check
in with the daemon and say,
"I'm here.
I'm ready to do some work for you.
Here's my name." That's in ID.
In, obviously, is saying this is an input
parameter for the server.
ID is just the variable name.
And in this case,
the parameter is a C string.
The server, then,
is going to provide a Mach port.
In this case, let's see,
a Mach port that the user
can use to send a message.
that the
client can then send
additional requests upon.
So when requests come in on
this Mach port to the server,
he's gonna be able to say, oh,
I know what port that is.
I know what client checked in
and I handed that port out to.
So I know like what state I had kept
for that application previously.
What gets generated from
this is client glue.
If you look in user include Mach,
you're going to see a bunch of defs
files and also the generated header
files for those Mach services.
And they basically look like this.
It's just C glue code.
The first parameter is the server port.
This was discovered via Bootstrap lookup
or handed back from some other routine.
Then just a char star ID.
Meg will take care of putting that
into the body of a Mach message.
And then as an out parameter,
the client port that the
server is going to provide.
It also generates this stub routine
for the server to implement.
Now, if somebody hands you
a defs file and says,
call my service,
you don't need the server glue.
But if you're going to
implement the server,
you have to basically provide
the body of this routine.
And toward the end in the demo,
I'll show what that looks like.
So how do you handle a Mach Message?
You get the data,
you cast it to a Mach Message header T,
and you switch on the message ID.
But that's kind of a pain.
So there are two utility routines
that you should know about.
Mach Message Server and
Mach Message Server Once.
Both of these take the Mach port that
you registered with the Bootstrap server
and the DMUX routine that Meg generated.
And in the first case,
Mach Message Server will
sit there in a loop,
accepting messages,
calling your DMUX routine,
sending the reply.
Mach Message Server Once does that,
but just once.
Sending replies is kind of difficult,
because you have to figure out
first whether a reply is warranted,
and second, you have to deal with, well,
the DMUX routine returned
a Mach Message header
of an appropriate size.
You have to worry about what
that size was and deal with
errors that occur in sending it.
What I would recommend is if you
need to send a reply directly,
to go to the Darwin sources and grab the
source code to Mach Message Server and
just sort of understand that,
copy and paste it into your
stuff with appropriate license,
whatever.
Anyway.
Core Foundation has support for Mach.
And it has this in a
couple of different ways,
but the most important are CF Mach port,
which wraps around a port,
optionally it creates it for you,
and it gives you a callback routine.
So when you register a CF Mach port
run loop source with your run loop,
and an event comes in,
it's going to call your
callback routine and say,
hey, here's a Mach message.
But like the previous slide alluded to,
it doesn't send the reply for you.
In that case,
you're going to have to set up the
reply structure yourself and send it.
And again, going back to the
Mach Message Server routine to
understand how to send that reply,
if you want to deal with Mach messages
via CF Mach port generated by Meg,
that's probably the right way to do it.
It gives you an invalidation mechanism.
This is really important because say
somebody checks in with you and says,
I'm going to -- I want
you to do some work.
Call me back on this Mach port.
And then that application
crashes or the user quits it.
The invalidation mechanism lets you know
that the Mach port you're working with,
you can't do anything with.
It's now invalid.
And if you're doing work on
behalf of that Mach port,
you could stop now because nobody's
ever going to hear about it.
CFMessagePort sits on top of CFMockPort,
and it sits on top of
the Bootstrap server,
and it lets you create, basically,
a Mach server that
accepts a blob of data.
This is a really handy thing to do.
If you just need to send data
between two applications,
CFMessagePort is probably
the right way to do it.
It has the restrictions of
the Bootstrap port world,
though.
So between sessions,
it's not going to work.
It'll work.
A daemon can advertise a server,
and clients inside the user
application will be able to send to it.
But userland applications,
or per-user applications, I should say,
aren't going to be reachable from
other user sessions or from daemons.
Now, what's the performance of all
these different lower-level APIs?
Well, pipe is basically linear.
These are the numbers that came out of
the... the test app I wrote that sent a
5-meg blob to a process that was forked.
MockMessage, on the other hand,
basically is completely flat.
It was kind of independent
of the message size.
Obviously, the memory was allocated all
beforehand and then sent along.
So MockMessage seemed to be
just a great way to message
arbitrarily large blobs of data.
Turns out,
and I don't even know if that's visible,
CFMessage is pretty
much just as efficient.
It's doing the Mach port
hand-rolled MockMessage directly.
That's why I would really recommend it,
especially if you don't need to
do inter-session communication.
Okay, so let's go up a layer,
talk about Apple Events.
First, let's define what we
mean by Apple Events.
It's kind of weird that
the word Apple Events means
so many different things.
It's like calling every product .NET.
So Apple Events came around in '91,
I think,
was the first time I heard about them.
AppleEvents is the technology
and the name of the framework.
It's also the name of a
type in the framework,
an AppleEvent descriptor record.
And it's also, you know, AppleEvents,
which is what we're all at today.
This is an AppleEvent.
It's under the application
services umbrella.
What that means is it doesn't necessarily
need a process manager connection.
And if you use AppleEvents and you're
linking against application services,
you can get by without
doing any user interaction.
User interaction is sort of
at the Carbon or Cocoa layer.
But if you're linking
against application services,
you can get by with writing a
daemon or writing a background
process that uses AppleEvents.
There is a lot of predefined
Apple Events that you can implement.
Back in the old days, this was called the
required for Apple Events.
Print, quit, save, something else.
So there are a lot of
Apple Events that you could implement.
The scripting sessions, which I guess the
AppleScript session was yesterday,
would have been the place to sort
of understand how to implement
scripting behaviors for your
application in terms of factoring
your applications for scriptability.
I would go back and review slides
from previous years' WWDC for that.
A couple of things to
know about Apple Events.
[Transcript missing]
So when would you need
to use AppleEvents?
Well, between applications.
So there are a bunch of
applications on your platform,
and some of them do certain things, like,
you know, flow text around an object or
print with certain attributes.
You can leverage those applications
because they accept AppleEvents that
allow you to program that behavior.
So between applications,
this is a great thing.
So how do you discover
-- how do you discover
An application that you can talk to.
In Jaguar and previous,
it basically was bound
to the process manager.
Applications would check in
with the process manager,
and the Apple event framework would
talk to the process manager to discover,
okay, you know, here's MACS.
You're trying to talk to an
application whose signature is MACS.
Whoever that is, that's great.
That happens to be the finder.
You could also,
if you launched an application
and you're giving back its
PID or process serial number,
you could target an application
by PID and process serial number.
In Panther, we've added a new Apple event
addressing type application bundle ID.
This basically replaces signature.
It's better to send to
com.apple.finder than to send to MACS,
if you can get away with
targeting Panther directly.
But in Jaguar,
you had to be a client of the process
manager to discover applications,
and you couldn't send
Apple events between sessions.
Well, you still can't send, in Panther,
We don't really allow that.
But we enforce a UID-based restriction.
Between user sessions,
applications owned by user A can
send to applications owned by user B.
Sorry.
Applications owned by user A can only
send to applications owned by user A.
Applications.
In B are restricted to sending to B.
The exception to this is that
applications owned by root,
and this includes daemons running
in the startup item space,
are allowed to send to any other
application on the system that's
registered for Apple events.
This is a very commonly requested
feature for people that are
trying to write Apache plugins.
They wanted to be able
to script applications,
and now they'll be able to.
So Apple Events are well supported,
very well supported,
by both the Carbon and Cocoa frameworks
and by third party frameworks that
are built on top of Carbon and Cocoa.
Events are received on the run loop and
dispatched to handlers that you have
registered within your application space.
Events that you send are
usually sent synchronously.
You send, and then you block for a reply.
That's sort of the older model.
There is a preferred way to do that,
which is to wait for a queued reply.
You send the event waiting
for a queued reply,
go off and do other things,
maybe update your UI, put up a sheet,
let other windows in
your application work.
And then when the reply
comes in from the server,
it's delivered to you as just another
event that you then associate with
the original event that you sent.
On the server side,
when you receive an event,
you can suspend it and then resume it
at a later time after you've done the
work that the event originally requested.
Thinking about suspension and
resumption is that these live in
the Carbon framework layer and
may necessitate user interface.
It's kind of a better model
if you can just deal with the
event right away or set up the
communications so that the original
event that came in had information
about how to send a reply later,
had some state with it that said, "Okay,
when you're done with the work,
send me an event back." Sort of
manage that asynchronous
reply mechanism yourself.
So scripting is not something that
comes for free in the Carbon Frameworks.
You need to implement an AETE resource.
This describes the classes,
the properties, or IVARs of the class,
if you will, and verbs that allow you
to operate on the class.
It lives in this resource,
and then the scripting implementations
get the resource and are able to present
UI to the user to allow the user to pull
out the things that they care about and
plug them together in interesting ways.
Cocoa, on the other hand,
because the application framework
has so much metadata available and so
much ability to introspect upon the
framework and the application running,
allows you to use a textual description
of what your application can do.
That's a script suite file,
and it will actually generate the
AET resource for you on the fly.
This is, again,
something that we talk about at length,
and probably going back over
previous years' WWDC slides,
it's better to understand how
to implement the scripting.
Okay, so what does an Apple event
actually look like?
It's a structure.
It's an 8-byte structure.
It's got a 4-byte data type,
which is a 4-character code,
and then a data handle.
In classic Mac OS 9 land,
that was a real handle,
and if somebody sent you data,
you were expected to dereference it,
cast it to whatever you wanted,
and then just work with it.
But when we did the
Carbon implementation,
we took the opportunity to say,
it's an opaque data handle.
Unfortunately, we didn't really enforce
that restriction,
and so a lot of people ported their apps
to Carbon and kept looking in the handle.
So when we changed that for Jaguar,
because we always said we
were going to change it,
a lot of apps broke, so we have sort of a
hacky workaround in place,
but it's not perfect,
and you're much better off using
accessories to get into the data.
Speaking of which,
there are two new APIs in Jaguar.
There's an API called AECreateDesk from
External Pointer and AECetDeskDataRange.
The first of these lets you say, okay,
here's an arbitrarily large
blob of memory that I'd like
to send to another application,
but I don't want to copy it
into the Apple Event Manager.
I promise not to modify it anytime soon.
It's an image or something that I got,
and I want to send it to
some other application.
Using AECreateDesk from External Pointer,
the Apple Event Manager will
tell you when it's done with it,
when you dispose of the descriptor.
It will decrement a
reference count and say,
okay, that descriptor is done.
You can free it now.
That will actually avoid copying the
memory into the Apple Event Manager,
and because the Apple Event Manager is
built on Mach messages,
it'll avoid copying all
that data into the receiving
application's address space.
So that's a really good way to improve
performance for large messages.
AECetDeskDataRange does
basically what that says.
In the past,
you could look at the data handle and
offset some offset and pull out a field.
If you pulled out of a structure,
AECetDeskDataRange lets you do
that without having to copy the
whole buffer to a local buffer.
So that's sort of the
data type in Apple Events.
There are also lists and records,
which are lists of those data types,
or basically dictionaries,
where the key to the dictionary
is another four-byte code.
A lot of the existing Apple Events that
you can send and receive have
well-established parameter orders.
So the open Apple Event, for example,
has a list of aliases that
you're supposed to open.
It is opaque.
Let's see.
So an Apple event record then is
sort of two records slammed together,
two AE records slammed together.
One is the parameters for the event.
That's what people typically
are going to deal with.
And the other is the
attributes of the event,
which is where the event came from,
what the event ID and class is.
It's useful to think of it as sort of
two records slammed together instead
of one sort of mysterious record.
So when you message data to another,
when you perform a send,
the data is copied into the other
application's address space.
If it is optimizable,
then it's optimized to
be a virtual memory copy.
Okay.
AppleEvents can be sent between machines.
We do this in 10 using the type
application URL signature--
application signature targeting
type thing-- targeted address type.
So what that looks like,
and this is a horrible, ugly thing,
but EPBC is the scheme
for remote Apple events.
You can optionally add the
username and password directly
to the outgoing message.
Then the host,
which is a required parameter,
and the app name,
which is a required parameter.
And then now we've added for Panther,
optionally,
the user ID and the process ID.
If those are present,
those will be used in order
to direct the Apple event that
comes in to a specific session.
So in order to do multi-session support,
in order to target a specific session,
you have to use the UID and PID.
Otherwise, it goes to the, I guess,
the current console user.
Panther also adds a new API,
AEList Remote Processes.
This provides the data of what
processes are available on a given host.
This was something we had
back in AppleTalk days.
Sorry.
This is something we had back in nine
days using remote Apple events over IP.
You would specify the name of the
server that you want to connect to,
and it would list the processes,
and then you could click
on one and bring it back.
This doesn't implement the UI behavior.
This is just the data behavior.
You'll have to implement the UI yourself,
but it should be trivial to do that.
AD servers also advertise
themselves on Rendezvous.
So, yes,
we're back to the AppleTalk days of being
able to browse machines on your network
that have program linking turned on.
So, if you need to do Rendezvous lookups,
you can use this eppc.tcp thing.
All right.
And it's actually pretty trivial to
use the Rendezvous APIs to discover,
you know, okay, these servers have these
applications available.
So, talk about the performance
of AppleEvents for a second.
There's the CFMessage performance,
and the AppleEvent performance is,
you know, it's good.
It's right there because it's using
the same underlying mechanisms
that the Mach layer provides.
In comparison,
the AppleEvent performance in
Puma was significantly worse
because it was copying the data
between address spaces every time.
It was basically linear
with message size.
So,
the AppleEvent performance in Panther is
actually 50% better than Jaguar as far
as number of messages it could send,
and that doesn't really show
up in this chart at all.
Okay, I'm gonna talk briefly about
Cocoa distributed objects,
because this is another topic
for a much larger session.
Cocoa distributed objects allow you
to implement a protocol that says,
Here's an object.
It has these behaviors.
You can now look at it from
your process in another address
space across the network,
make method calls upon
it or send it messages,
and whatever parameters you pass to it,
I will marshal those parameters into
a stream and send it over a wire.
It allows you to provide
services for other applications,
like the services menu uses
distributed objects in order to
implement a lot of its behaviors.
So what you get as a client
of distributed objects is
an object that looks like an
object that you can work with,
but method calls to it, messages to it,
actually go over a wire and
talk to another process that
receives those messages,
interprets them,
and performs an action on a local object.
So between processes,
it's going to use Mach Messages
typically to perform this.
I guess there's also an
option to use pipes directly.
Intermachine, it's going to use sockets,
TCP/IP,
and it will automatically register your
object for discovery with Rendezvous.
So some of the objects that
you'll see when we talk about
Distributed objects.
There's NSPort.
This is the object that is
responsible for serializing a
request given a particular transport.
It's sort of created with the intention
of I'm going over a Mach message,
so how should I serialize this request?
There's Connection,
which allows you to discover objects.
It's sort of how objects are published
from your server application.
It says bound to run loop,
but actually the port is
bound to the run loop.
That's sort of the thing
that receives the message is
actually bound to the run loop.
And then there's the NSProxy protocol,
which has actually got two
concrete implementations.
In a client application,
you're going to look at
the NSDistantObject object.
It takes care of using the port and the
connection to serialize the request.
On the server side,
it's called an NSProtocolChecker.
That ensures that the message that
the server receives adheres to what
the server really intends to publish.
Now, this is sort of the flow of events
through distributed objects.
And I guess it's pretty
much self-explanatory.
Once an object is vended to a client,
he just makes method calls to it.
It flows down that pipe across ports
between processes or machine boundaries,
and then ultimately results
in the vended object.
So to finish talking
about distributed objects,
it allows you to vend an
Objective-C object for
other applications to see.
One thing to note is that
messages that are sent to
Objective-C objects are synchronous.
You block for a reply.
If something goes wrong,
you could be blocked for a long time.
So it's possible to set
a timeout on a reply,
and that's probably a good thing to do.
You set a timeout on the
connection object itself.
And it's not as efficient as something
you could come up with yourself.
If you need to send a particular
piece of data to another application,
and you need a very
high-performance way of doing that,
you could probably come up
with your own messaging scheme,
leveraged on top of AppleEvents,
CFMessagePort, or MachPorts,
that's going to be more efficient
than just using distributed objects.
On the other hand,
there are a lot of existing distributed
objects conversations taking place,
so it may make more sense
to use one of those.
It's a performance versus ability to
leverage what the framework provides.
It's a decision you're
going to have to make.
Distributed objects vended
inter-process have the same
restrictions as AppleEvents.
Well, yeah, let's see.
It has the same restrictions
as CFMessagePort,
in that they're isolated
within one session.
Discoverability is isolated
to within one bootstrap space.
Okay, so Web Services.
In Puma,
we introduced Web Service Support in
the Apple Event Manager,
of all places.
And what this did was serialized
Apple Event records and container types
into XML and send it along to a server.
In Jaguar,
we moved this down a level and made it
applicable to Objective-C data types
and core foundation data types for
the scalar values and container types.
It supports XMLRPC and SOAP and still
supports Apple Events and AppleScript by
virtue of supporting Apple Events.
So it's possible to write an
AppleScript application that talks
to Web Services out on the Internet,
and it just reads like any message.
It's not a message called
to any other application.
You get back a dictionary with
some high-level constructs in it.
You can look at the data as if it
were just an Apple Event record.
In Panther,
we've added a message parsing API,
so it's now possible to write
servers in Web Services.
Okay, so how do you invoke a web service?
The thing you want to look for is
called a WS Method Invocation Ref.
This is the point that,
this is an object that handles
serialization of outgoing requests.
It's constructed with a schema and a URL.
The schema specifies XMLRPC or so.
The URL is, of course,
the endpoint that you're going
to do the HTTP post to get to.
You then set parameters on it.
You have to tell it the dictionary,
which is the parameter list.
It's prepositional.
So you have to say parameter one,
value three, parameter two, value hello,
and then the order that those
parameters should be serialized.
The reason you have to do both is
because depending on the scheme you use,
it may be necessary for the serializer
to emit things in a particular order.
XMLRPC is positional.
It doesn't care about the
name of the parameter.
It cares about the positions,
whereas SOAP tends to be prepositional,
where it cares about the name
but not necessarily the order.
However, there are some SOAP servers that
also require that the order be as
specified in the originating document.
So adding the order parameter,
when you call set parameters,
having the order is very important.
So then you just invoke it.
You can invoke it synchronously,
in which case you'll block until the
reply comes back from the server.
Or you can schedule it on your run loop,
and when the reply comes in,
you're handed a dictionary.
The dictionary contains
either the reply data,
the result of this operation,
or it could contain a fault with
information about what happened,
what went wrong with this request.
So the reply from a web service
invocation is always a dictionary
that you have to look into to extract
the actual reply that you expect.
that you expect.
Okay, so how to write a server.
It's actually really simple.
The server API isn't really a server.
It does not listen on any sockets.
All it does is it basically filters
a XML document into a CFDictionary,
which you then implement the
sort of demuxing behavior,
pull out the message name and
do something based on that.
So the thing to look for in the
new API is WS Protocol Handler Ref.
This is created with the
schema of XMLRPC or SOAP.
You then call copy request
dictionary with this thing.
You've given it a CFData XML document
that you received over the wire,
and it gives you back a CFDictionary.
The CFDictionary has the method name,
and it's got the parameter
order and the parameter list,
the parameter order that it received.
So you extract the
parameters from the list.
You do something based upon them,
and then you call create reply document.
The two parameters to create reply
document are the original dictionary
passed back by copy request dictionary,
because that has sort of meta
information about the connection,
the name of the message,
which might be relevant
in forming the reply,
and then a CF type,
which is the type that you wish
to send back to the server.
So you don't have to wrap it.
It doesn't have a,
it's not prepositional.
It's not prepositional at all.
It's just the raw CF or NS type.
So you send the reply document
using whatever server that
you're embedding this in,
and then you profit, because,
I don't know,
that's what they always say on Slashdot.
Okay, so there is no real free lunch
with Web Services discovery.
There are some standards
that are standardizing,
sort of accreting over in the corner,
to allow for discovery of Web Services,
but we don't support them yet.
Most of the time, when somebody says,
"You need to call my web
service," they're going to hand
you a textual description of
what that web service expects,
and that's usually a very
easy way to implement it.
You just sort of go, "Okay,
parameter name this,
should be this value,
this value." That's sort of
how the XMLRPC community works.
The SOAP community is trying
to automate that a lot more,
and they have the
Web Services Description Language for
describing the messages and the methods
that are available via Web Services.
We have a tool, WSMakesDubs,
that tries to understand WSDL documents
and produce glue code that sits on top
of the Web Services core framework.
So if you actually view
the slides from last year,
I run that tool and describe
and show how that tool is used
to create an application that
queries some Web Services,
sort of automatically generating
the glue code for you.
Okay, so I do have a few minutes
to go through my demo.
And if I could have Demo Machine 2.
There it is.
So one of the things that comes
up a lot is people want to be
able to write Apache plug-ins or
Apache modules to talk to applications.
So I'm going to use a couple of the
technologies that I talked about
today to build this application.
I've got it built,
so I'll just run through it and
then I'll show you the code.
So the first thing is that
I have an Objective-C application
that uses Web Services to talk
to a host over Web Services.
So someplace there is
a Web Services server,
and it is talking to
iTunes over Apple Events.
So here's my little application.
I get a little drawer here.
I can open up these wedges,
and it's going to send a request to
the server each time I open a wedge
to get the-- who created the web.
the song, the title of the track,
the name of the artist.
So go ahead and everybody likes polka.
Go ahead and play a little polka music,
yeah.
Turn it down because it's annoying.
And so as you can see,
I've got a little progress bar
here at the bottom that updates.
It's actually doing a poll to
get that once every second,
it fires a timer off,
sends a request off through Apache,
and tries to sort of update
the title and the time.
I click stop, and oh no,
an exception occurred.
This is a good opportunity to first
mute the sound and then go into the
script that implements all this.
So the way the demo is put together--
and I'm actually going to make the demo
available through DTS because it does
show a lot of these technologies-- is
that there is an Apple script application
that receives the XMLRPC request
and does something based on it.
it.
So here's a whole bunch of Apple scripts.
Play track.
This is probably the
easiest thing to understand.
When my tool said play track and gave the
ID of the track that I wanted to play,
it talked to Apache.
Apache talked to a daemon that sent
the Apple event onto this script,
which then sent the Apple event
to iTunes to play the song.
So I got an exception because
I had commented this out.
[Transcript missing]
Polka is still playing in the background.
Now I can stop it,
which I'm sure everybody
is relieved about.
Because I'm an uber geek,
I really don't want to take
my hands off the home row.
I have a Perl script.
that uses one of the Perl XMLRPC things
to call my web service running in Apache.
And I'm doing this to show what
the message actually looks like.
So if I'm going to get the genres,
it's a simple call
XMLRPC Perl subroutine.
And the name of the XMLRPC method
happens to be the bundle identifier
of that AppleScript application
followed by the name of the subroutine.
So the architecture underneath that's
glued to Apache is actually general.
It will allow you to send a
AppleScript do subroutine command
to any application that implements
AppleScript attachability.
So just we can demo that real quick.
So I want to go to Books and Spoken.
And I always like this song.
It's a good song.
Let's go ahead and play Polka Power.
Oh, it's all about the Pentiums.
OK.
So anyway,
you can see that the script is just
working the same way as an application.
It could be running on Linux.
It could be running on Windows.
That's really what
Web Services is all about,
having a heterogeneous environment.
So I still have a couple minutes.
Just going to show you some of the
source code that does all this stuff.
Where to start?
Let's start with the defs
file for the bridge code that
runs alongside of Apache.
So the thing is, you don't want Apache to
be running as root.
You never want that.
So instead,
Apache looks up a daemon that is
running as root that is allowed to send
Apple events into this user's context.
The daemon implements
this single Mach message.
It takes an input
XML request and an output,
and it outputs the XML RPC response.
The implementation of that,
this is what Mig generated for me,
this doMessage server-side stub.
You can see that the input parameters
are the address of the blob of data
and the size of the blob of data,
and then I'm to supply to it the size
of the blob of data that I'm returning.
At its count,
Mig will actually take care of
sending that response for me.
This is where I'm looking
up the name of the daemon.
So the Apache module just gets
instantiated by Apache when
I go to a specific URL,
looks up the name of the daemon.
It has already gotten the
data out of the HTTP post.
Then it calls my daemon right here.
I'm using the CFData stuff to sort
of wrap the data that comes in.
And then it gets its response,
and it forwards it back out Apache.
And Apache deals with setting
up the HTTP connection,
accepting it, dealing with errors,
et cetera.
Okay, so like I said,
we're going to put that on the
developer website so that people can,
you know, write their own daemons
doing all this stuff.
I forgot my clicker.
And with that,
if we could have the slides back.
Can I get slides?
Okay.
So that was the demo.
Oh, there was a nice build on that
that I forgot to do last time.
So showing that you can go and use all
these technologies in various places.
This is really how you would
architect such a system.
You would use web services to accept
incoming events from a heterogeneous
environment and use XMLRPC and the
parsing APIs to figure out what
the data is and use Apple Events to
talk to an application that's
providing some service for you.
All right, so let's summarize what
we've talked about today.
It was a lot of different technologies.
Pipes and sockets,
this is typically for legacy code
or for tools or for things that
need stream data between processes.
Notify, this is great for
broadcasting a state change,
and if you're writing new code where you
might think you're going to use Signal,
please use Notify instead.
You'll much prefer it.
Mach Message allows you to
write really complex servers,
and it's very powerful,
and it's really at the
core of what ROS does,
and the best reference for that is
probably the source code in Darwin.
CFMessagePort is a great
way of doing blobs of data
messaging between applications.
It's very efficient,
and it works really well
with all our frameworks.
Apple Events,
anytime you can add Apple Events to your
application to make it more scriptable.
The iTunes guys didn't know that
I was going to have a Perl script
talking to their applications.
They didn't need to know.
They just had to implement
the scriptability,
and then I can come along and
leverage the work that they did.
And then Objective-C distributed objects,
if you need to participate in an
existing conversation or if you have
a new application that wants to be
able to create a new conversation,
Objective-C distributed objects
is a fine way to do that.
Okay, so we wrap up.
Here are a couple of sessions
I want to point you at.
Building applications for
managed network environments.
A lot of what is applicable
to networking is applicable
to interprocess communication.
So,
sort of understanding networking both in
that session and in CFNetwork in depth,
which I also highly recommend,
you're going to get a much better
understanding about how to write
applications that don't block when
they don't need to and perform
really well on our platform.
Writing threaded
applications on Mac OS X.
Threads are really just kind
of like another process.
Sort of the same things are
going to apply to sending a
message to another thread.
And then stump the experts tonight,
which we'll all go to.
So, here are the names of some
of the technology people that
you might want to contact.
The important thing here is the
URL at the bottom where all this
information ends up being anyway.
So, I don't expect people to actually be
able to write all these things down.
Reference library.
This should be interesting because
probably the best book on Unix
messaging is going to be the original
Unix book by Kernighan and Pike.
There's a URL you can go
to to order that book.
The Mach documentation,
I don't think Apple produces any.
The best documentation I found are some
PostScript files on an FTP server at CMU.
So, that's where you want to go to
learn how to write Mach servers.
Inside Macintosh IEC talks
about Apple Events.
It's a little dated because, you know,
it was written 12 years ago,
but it's all still applicable.
So if you want to understand
Apple Events better,
you should go there.
And then the Web Services Documentation
Online talks about the Jaguar APIs.
There is no documentation up
on the new server APIs yet.
It's sort of self-documented
by the header file,
and it's pretty easy.